So now that we've talked about
the conditions under which it
makes sense to use
parallel streams,
let's talk about the conditions
under which it doesn't make
sense to use parallel streams.
And this is perhaps
even more important,
because if you're
not careful you'll
start to get carried
away and apply
streams where you
shouldn't be doing it.
And it's important to know
what not to do as much as it's
important to know what to do.
So, it turns out that certain
programs just don't work well
with parallel streams.
In fact, certain
programs don't work well
with parallel
computing in general.
One type of problem is if
you have data sources that
are expensive to split
and/or split unevenly,
so you don't get this nice
balanced splitting approach.
If you take a look
at the ex14 example
that we've talked
about earlier, you'll
see that it's an
illustration of this.
So, just kind of a recap
for what we went over
in the demo, this application
makes an ArrayList
that contains all the words
in the works of Shakespeare.
And then it converts that
ArrayList into a LinkedList,
so that we have a LinkedList
version and an ArrayList
version.
And then we go ahead
and do some computations
in parallel for the ArrayLists,
for the LinkedList version.
And what you see is that the
ArrayList parallel stream
becomes much, much faster
than the LinkedList version,
especially as the size
of the input goes up.
So for small inputs, it
doesn't really matter.
As the inputs get larger,
the LinkedList version
takes a very, very
long time to run.
And obviously we've covered
this in our earlier lesson
on demoing the
Spliterator performance
when we were talking about
Java parallel stream internals.
So just keep that in mind.
It's a good idea to try to
use data structures that
split evenly, and
split efficiently,
and don't copy the data.
Why does this work so
well for ArrayLists?
Well, obviously, it's because
the trySplit() method is very
optimized.
It runs in constant
time, it basically
just does some mathematics
to figure out the midpoint,
does that efficiently.
It's just an addition
and a divide by 2,
or a right-shift by 1.
And then we go ahead and
split the ArrayList evenly
without having to copy any data.
So the list stays in place and
we just basically recompute
the indices.
And when everything is done,
we end up with a single item.
And that's the one that
we're going to accept
in tryAdvance().
In contrast, the
LinkedList's Spliterator
runs in basically linear time.
It's certainly not constant
time, it's much slower.
It's more complicated-- first
we create some fixed-size chunk,
and then we go ahead and copy
the data into this chunk,
and then we go ahead and
run this Spliterator that
goes ahead and creates a
Spliterator from the chunk.
And that has to keep going
on and on and on in order
to be able to do
this, and it just
is going to take a long time.
It copies the data, it
doesn't split evenly.
So I think, again, you can
get a good sense of why
the LinkedList
implementation was not
as performant, as the input size
grew, as the ArrayList version.
Another aspect here-- and this
is not unrelated to what we
just talked about, but it can
be looked at in a somewhat
different way--
if the startup
costs of parallelism
are higher than the amount
of data we actually process.
This comes back to the N times
Q model we talked about before.
So if N times Q
is low, then we're
probably going to pay
a lot more overhead
to set up the parallelism
apparatus than we
will getting a win from
our use of parallelism.
And a good example of this
is shown in my ex16 folder
on my GitHub account,
my repository.
And what I do here
is I show a couple
of different implementations
of factorial.
One of the implementations
here is going to be done
in parallel-- it's called
ParallelStreamFactorial--
and the other
implementation here
is going to be done with
a sequential string.
And as it turns out, if you
pass in small values of n,
like n equals 10, or n
equals 20, or whatever,
you're probably
going to find out
that the parallel version is
actually going to run slower
than the sequential version.
Why the heck is that?
The reason is that it takes
a while to partition things
with a Spliterator.
It takes a while to reduce
stuff with the combining stage.
And so unless you're going to
be doing large values of n,
it's really not much
of a win at all.
In fact, for small values of
n, the sequential solution
will be more efficient.
It's also sort of
worth knowing--
you'll notice that this
particular implementation uses
big integers.
So I end up using
big integers in order
to be able to compute
the n factorial.
So even though the parameter
to the factorial is Long,
the result is a BigInteger.
And that's because after about--
I think it's 23, an n of 23,
the size of the factorial
grows so quickly that it
exceeds the precision in a Long.
So we have to use BigInteger
in order to do that.
So that's yet another
reason why you really
gotta have a large number
to make this thing pay off.
In fact, for small
numbers of factorials,
you'll see that you really don't
want to use streams at all.
It'll be faster to do, probably,
iteratively with a loop.
But of course what's
interesting here
is what happens in the limit,
as these sizes get much larger.
Another consideration is,
what's the cost of combining
the partial results?
This, of course, is
really what matters
if you're dealing especially
with non-concurrent collectors.
So if you take a look at
the ex14 folder in my GitHub
repository, and you go back and
watch the other video we talked
about earlier that quantified
the collector performance,
you'll see that
combining partial results
can be costly, too.
So the example we
looked at before,
once again we make ourselves
a LinkedList of words--
this is a LinkedList of all
the words in Shakespeare--
and then we go ahead and
we have a parallel stream
that will collect those words
together into a TreeSet.
And it turns out that the
performance will be poor here.
Actually, the
performance will be poor
if we use an ArrayList
instead of a LinkedList.
And that's because
there's overhead
of having to merge together
these intermediate result
containers in parallel streams,
as we talked about when
we discussed the concurrent
versus non-concurrent
collectors and demoed
the performance.
Now, you could
maybe get back some
win if you did a lot of
work between the point
where you split
things up in parallel,
and where you collected
them together.
So if you did a
lot of work there,
that would drive the
value of Q high enough
perhaps to eventually be a win.
But as we saw earlier,
you have to be
kind of careful with this.
One way to address this
issue is to switch from using
a non-concurrent collector--
such as the one that's created
by the toCollection factory
method on the collectors
utility --
and instead replace it with some
kind of concurrent collector,
like the
ConcurrentHashSetCollector
that we have defined
here in this example.
And this can be used to help to
optimize the reduction phase,
because we will just
collect everything in place.
And in fact when we ran
the performance tests
in our earlier lesson on
demoing collector performance,
you can see that
as the values of n
get larger, as we have more
and more words to process
and collect, that the concurrent
collector runs a lot faster
than--
the parallel
concurrent collector
runs a lot faster than
the parallel stream
with the non-concurrent
collector,
and of course both of
those perform much better
than the sequential
collectors, because they're
able to use threads.
So even if you do have to use
non-concurrent collectors that
have to merge things
together, if you've
got a good implementation
of parallel streams
and a fast set of cores,
you'll get a speed-up.
But you get a better
speed-up if you're
able to use the
concurrent collectors.
Yet another consideration--
and this is pretty subtle--
not all stream operations
exploit parallelism
effectively.
Lots of them do,
but not all of them.
So let's take a
look at an example.
And this example comes
from my ex15 folder
in my GitHub repository.
So here we're going to
have a little stream that's
going to use the
Stream.iterate method.
It's basically a generator.
This produces so-called
infinite unbounded streams.
And it's basically going to go
through and generate a range
of numbers from 2 to infinity.
It keeps adding this each time.
I guess it'll
eventually wrap around.
But it'll generate a
large number of values
indefinitely, if you
let it run indefinitely.
And then we run
this in parallel.
We filter out the odd
numbers, so there's
only even numbers allowed
through the filter.
And then we limit the whole
thing to some value of n.
So we end up-- let's say we
have the first 100 even numbers.
And then we go ahead and
we find the square root
of those numbers
using the map method
and a method reference
called findSQRT,
and then we collect
that into a list.
So if you run this
in parallel, it
turns out it's
really, really slow.
And if you watch the-- if you
put a peek() call in there
and print out the results,
you'll see that it's really,
really inefficient.
And the reason for that is
that Stream.iterate and limit
split and parallelize very
poorly, because iterate
creates an ordered stream.
And that just turns
out to be a nightmare.
It's very, very slow.
In contrast, we could
get the same result--
we could compute the first n--
the square root of the
first n even numbers--
much more efficiently by using
some different mechanisms.
So here we're going to use the
range() method on LongStream,
which splits very nicely and
therefore runs efficiently
in parallel.
So in this case, you
can see that we're
going to generate the first
n even numbers in parallel,
and we're going to filter out
odd numbers, get rid of them.
We're going to go ahead
and find the square root
and collect it into a list.
So if you time the two results
the range() version is way,
way faster.
So the lesson to come
away with from this
is make sure you pick
the right model of--
right operations
to do your task.
Not everything parallelizes
as nicely as you might expect.
And of course, the last
thing I'll say here is that--
or the last point about
the performance issues
if you don't have many cores,
you don't have any cores,
you just have one core,
or just one processor,
you're not going to get much
of a speed-up from parallelism
at all.
One more thing I
want to point out,
briefly-- it's not necessarily
a performance issue,
but it's more of a
functionality issue.
For various reasons that
are a bit mysterious,
there's no easy built-in means
to shut down the processing
of a parallel stream.
So once the parallel stream
has been set into motion,
it'll just keep running
until an exception is thrown,
or until you program
it to do something
to cause it to shut down.
So one way to do this
is to use some kind
of static volatile flag, like
some kind of canceled flag.
And then you could
set that to true.
And if you have been
canceled, then you
could have your behavior
throw an exception.
Now, again, it would be nice
if there was an easier way
to do this, but that's
kind of the way it works.
So just be aware of that.
There's no easy way to
shut down parallel streams.
They typically run
until they complete.
And if you don't
like that, you should
either consider using
a mechanism like this,
or pick a different
mechanism altogether,
like CompletableFutures.